# take merge views from corsix branch #3273
Merged
geohot merged 10 commits into master from corsix_merge_views last month

geohot commented last month • 
This makes Winograd twice as fast (to compile) on M3

@geohot
take merge views from corsix branch
6b03349
@geohot
Collaborator
Author
geohot commented last month
@corsix I remember you mentioned having a better merge views, I found it

This is the fix I need for Winograd, but it seems like it breaks something else.

@geohot
Collaborator
Author
geohot commented last month
This should also be able to share a lot of code with reshape I think. The reshape thing is just a specialized version of this where the second view has to be contiguous.

geohot added 2 commits last month
@geohot
better DEBUG
9c157bd
@geohot
max views
0a35b8d
@corsix
Contributor
corsix commented last month
FWIW, taking out the tinygrad/shape/view.py change seems to put it in a better place (said change was only there because merge_views was very occasionally too good in synthetic tests, and that View.create change was an easy way to make the competitor equally good).

@geohot
remove view.py change
f3025f4
@geohot
Collaborator
Author
geohot commented last month • 
Too good? I didn't really understand that change, is there a bug with/without it?

Seems like tests pass without it, and math fuzzer good to 100k.

Is this merge_views complete? $1000 bounty if you can prove it is. (doesn't have to be Lean or something crazy, I'm fine with a Python proof that makes all the cases clear and tests them)

@corsix
Contributor
corsix commented last month
I didn't really understand that change

There's long-standing code in View.create to canonicalise strides: if any dimension has size 1, then its stride can be canonicalised to 0. The change added another case of canonicalisation: if any dimension has size >1, but is masked such that only one index in the dimension is unmasked (e.g. a dimension with range from 0 through 10, but with <4 and >4 all masked off, leaving 4 as the only unmasked index), then its stride can also be set to 0, albeit with a corresponding adjustment required to the offset (e.g. continuing the example, if said dimension had stride X, we'd need to add 4*X to the offset).

Too good?

The context was a unit test that compared the following:

A: Start with some shape X, applied a sequence of elementary transforms to it to create Y, then applied another sequence of elementary transforms to create Z.
B: Start with shapeof(Y), apply the 2nd sequence of elementary transforms to that, then do merge_views between Y and that.
The expectation was that (B) would create something complicated, then the merge_views would simplify it back down, ideally getting as simple as (A). In practice, it sometimes created something simpler than (A), because (B) naturally canonicalised away masked-to-single-element dimensions as a consequence of removing masked elements then canonicalising then re-applying padding. In those cases, to get the results of (A) and (B) to be identical, (A) also needed to canonicalise away masked-to-single-element dimensions, which is the view.py change.

is there a bug with/without it?

It slightly increased the number of cases where (A) gave identical result to (B). At least in the tests I was looking at, in all cases (A) and (B) gave equivalent results, just not identical results. That said, there is clearly some bug with it based on the earlier test failures in this PR.

Is this merge_views complete?

It isn't sufficient to make the aforementioned unit test always give identical results for (A) and (B); testing showed various cases where either (A) was slightly simpler, or (B) was slightly simpler, or (A) and (B) were equally complex but decided to express the complexity in slightly different ways. Is there some weaker sense in which it is complete? Perhaps.

@geohot
Collaborator
Author
geohot commented last month • 
Ahh, I understand the change, and I'm curious what that broke. Seems to me it should be correct. I'll write some tests to try to figure it out.

By complete I mean:

all pairs of views that can be merged are
all pairs of views that can't be merged aren't
I'm not sure if there's any examples where 3 views can be merged but neither of the pairs can, if those exist it would mess with the definition of complete a bit.

geohot and others added 3 commits last month
@geohot
Merge branch 'master' into corsix_merge_views
4935f7d
@geohot
Revert "remove view.py change" 
bc20b79
@geohot
only allow filter on non symbolic
454c70d
@github-actionsGitHub Actions
github-actions bot commented last month
Changes
Name                              Lines    Diff    Tokens/Line    Diff
------------------------------  -------  ------  -------------  ------
tinygrad/shape/view.py              166      +4           20.1    +0.3
tinygrad/shape/shapetracker.py      150     +55           17.1    -1.0


total lines changes: +59
@geohot
Collaborator
Author
geohot commented last month • 
Huh, so the test_shrink_const_then_cast is fixed it seems by the canonicalization, it was previously failing.

@chenyuxyz
Collaborator
chenyuxyz commented last month
the test construct in test_shrink_const_then_cast became contiguous it seems, so it's no longer a valid test case to check if cast preserves st. fine to remove it if that's the case

@geohot
Collaborator
Author
geohot commented last month
I have a different fix for this in #3277

geohot and others added 3 commits last month
@geohot
oops, correct fix
f9bccff
@geohot
Merge branch 'master' into corsix_merge_views
85a383b
@geohot
comment to explain
8170f95
@geohot geohot merged commit b57a16a into master last month
15 checks passed
@geohot geohot deleted the corsix_merge_views branch last month
@geohot geohot mentioned this pull request last month
Revert "take merge views from corsix branch" #3278
 Merged
@corsix
Contributor
corsix commented last month
Ah, I see you identified the bug as the handling of symbolics, as comparison operators on symbolics end up false-y if the comparison is always false, but end up true-y if the comparison is potentially true. Both new calls to any in view.py are affected; one fix as you've done is instanceof checks (though the 2nd any also needs them), the other (more subtle) approach is to invert the direction of the condition and wrap it in a not (e.g. b+1 >= e -> not (b+1 < e)).

@geohot
Collaborator
Author
geohot commented last month
Ahh yea, the second any probably caused the issue with llama on master.

@chenyuxyz perhaps symbolic should assert on those comparisons?

@corsix
Contributor
corsix commented last month
FWIW, this behaviour of symbolics is why the revised merge_views has things like if not (merged_term >= merged_size) and not (merged_term < 0):, rather than the more obvious way of writing that without nots.

@ronak69
Contributor
ronak69 commented last month
@corsix @geohot

comparison operators on symbolics end up false-y if the comparison is always false, but end up true-y if the comparison is potentially true.

Comparison operation on symbolics will return True only if the condition is true for all values of the symbolic between min and max. Analogously, return False if false for all.

The problem occurs when for some values between min and max, the condition is true and for others it is false. In this case, the comparison operation will return LtNode instead of a bool; but since you have put the condition in an if-statement, python will try to convert the LtNode into a bool by calling LtNode.__bool__(). But guess what, a LtNode will always get converted to True.

I have a more readable solution for this problem: explicitly checking if the comparison returned True or it was LtNode or False. So, you can replace pattern if x < y with if (x < y) is True and pattern if not x < y with if (x < y) is False.

see also: #2469 (comment) and #1924 (comment) for original.

To catch these kind of bugs, why not just put an always failing assert in LtNode.__bool__()?

The assertions in this patch does not fail when running test/test_symbolic_ops.py and test/test_symbolic_jit.py.

diff --git a/tinygrad/shape/view.py b/tinygrad/shape/view.py
index acdd4b9b..3bb0a2f7 100644
--- a/tinygrad/shape/view.py
+++ b/tinygrad/shape/view.py
@@ -85,6 +85,16 @@ class View:
     contiguous = offset == 0 and mask is None and strides == strides_for_shape(shape)
     # if any dimension has size >1, but is masked such that only one index in the dimension is unmasked
     # then its stride can also be set to 0, albeit with a corresponding adjustment required to the offset
+
+    if mask:
+      explicit = [(b+1 >= e) is True for b,e in mask]
+      flip = [not (b+1 < e) for b,e in mask]
+      assert explicit == flip
+
+      explicit = [(b >= e) is True for b,e in mask]
+      flip = [not (b < e) for b,e in mask]
+      assert explicit == flip
+
     if mask and any(elim := [not (b+1 < e) for b,e in mask]):
       if any(not (b < e) for b,e in mask):
         strides, offset, mask = (0,) * len(shape), 0, ((0,0),) * len(shape)
